This readme.txt file was generated on 20200302 by Chris Curry


-------------------
GENERAL INFORMATION
-------------------


1. Title of Dataset 

APAL 2019: Postural Data, Game Performance, and Subjective Responses of Cybersickness in Virtual Reality Head-Mounted Displays

2. Author Information


  Principal Investigator Contact Information
        Name: Christopher Curry
           Institution: University of Minnesota
           Email: curry134@umn.edu
	

  Associate or Co-investigator Contact Information
        Name: Ruixuan Li
           Institution: University of Minnesota
           Email: lixx3747@umn.edu
	
  Associate or Co-investigator Contact Information
        Name: Nicolette Peterson 
           Institution: University of Minnesota
           Email: pete9746@umn.edu
	
Associate or Co-investigator Contact Information
        Name: Thomas Stoffregen
           Institution: University of Minnesota
           Email: tas@umn.edu
 

3. Date of data collection: 2018-02-05 to 2018-05-28

4. Geographic location of data collection (where was data collected?): University of Minnesota, Affordance Perception Action Lab

5. Information about funding sources that supported the collection of the data:

Christopher Curry was supported by NSF #1734815. 


--------------------------
SHARING/ACCESS INFORMATION
-------------------------- 


1. Licenses/restrictions placed on the data:

CC0 1.0 Universal Public Domain Dedication

2. Links to publications that cite or use the data:

Curry, C., Li, R., Peterson, N., & Stoffregen, T. A. (2020). Cybersickness in Virtual Reality Head-Mounted Displays: Examining the Influence of Sex Differences and Vehicle Control. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 1-7.

3. Links to other publicly accessible locations of the data:


4. Links/relationships to ancillary data sets:


5. Was data derived from another source? No
           If yes, list source(s):


6. Recommended citation for the data:
Curry, Christopher; Li, Ruixuan; Peterson, Nicolette; Stoffregen, Thomas. (2019). APAL 2019: Postural Data, Game Performance, and Subjective Responses of Cybersickness in Virtual Reality Head-Mounted Displays. Retrieved from the Data Repository for the University of Minnesota, https://doi.org/10.13020/a9w0-8k04. 



---------------------
DATA & FILE OVERVIEW
---------------------


1. File List
   A. Filename: APAL 2019_Cybersickness_Demographics_Data        
      Short description: An Excel file containing the demographics of all participants.       


        
   B. Filename: Demographics Data Sheet        
      Short description: A Word file containing questions that participants were asked.         


  
   C. Filename: APAL 2019 SSQ Scoring       
      Short description: Short description: A Word file that provides instructions on how to score the SSQ sheets.

   D. Filename: APAL 2019_Cybersickness_Demographics_Data        
      Short description: An Excel file containing the demographics of all participants.       


   E. Filename: APAL 2019 SSQ Data        
      Short description: An Excel file containing SSQ scores from participants.   

   F. Filename: SSQ Questionnaire        
      Short description: A Word file containing a generic SSQ, which was used repeatedly throughout the experiment.       
        
   G. Filename: APAL 2019 Polhemus Data      
      Short description: A ZIP folder of all kinematic data collected during VR exposure. Excel spreadsheets are labeled male and female and contain tabs for each of the participants belonging to those respected groups.

   H. Filename: APAL 2019 Force Plate Data      
      Short description: A ZIP folder of all kinematic data collected prior to VR exposure. Each excel file is labeled by Subject number and the experimental condition they were in.

2. Relationship between files:        

All files contain collected data or are forms used in the 2019 APAL Study.

3. Description of specific codes, acronyms, or used (e.g., explanation of the meaning of blank cells): 

Scores for the symptoms for the specific aspects
	Nausea-related subscore (N)
	Oculomotor-related subscore (O)
	Disorientation-related subscore (D)
	Total Score (TS) 

Score calculations
	Nausea = [1] x 9.54
	Oculomotor = [2] x 7.58
	Disorientation = [3]  x 13.92
	Total Score = ([1] + [2] + [3]) x 3.74

* Total is the sum obtained by adding the symptoms scores. Omitted scores are zero


4. Additional related data collected that was not included in the current data package:

N/A. 


5. Are there multiple versions of the dataset? yes/no
No. 
  






--------------------------
METHODOLOGICAL INFORMATION
--------------------------


1. Description of methods used for collection/generation of data: 
Prior to donning a virtual reality head-mounted display (HMD), participants were asked demographic questions that were pertinent to this study. After the questions were asked, we gathered their height and weight. Participants then conducted two visual tasks while they stood on a force plate. In one of the visual tasks, participants searched for a target letter, while in the other task participants maintained their gaze within a blank cue card. Data on postural activity were obtained using a force plate (AccuSway Plus; AMTI, Watertown, MA). We collected displacement of the center of pressure (COP) in CM for the AP and ML axes at 50 Hz.  

Participants then donned the HMD and played a video game for 15 minutes. During this exposure,  we monitored body sway using a magnetic tracking system (FasTRAK, Polhemus, Colchester VT). To measure motion, we used two sensors,
each sampled at 60 Hz. One sensor was attached to  the HMD, and one between the shoulder blades (at the level of the C7 vertebra), using cloth medical tape. We retained data for the anterior-posterior (AP) and mediolateral (ML) axes.  

2. Methods for processing the data:


Participants were assigned to the Well and Sick groups based solely on their responses to the forced-choice, yes/no question, Are you motion sick?, at the time of
SSQ-2 or SSQ-3 (e.g., Munafo et al., 2017; Stoffregen & Smart, 1998). The Total Severity Score was computed following the recommended manner (Kennedy et al., 1993).   
SSQ are not normally distributed and, for this reason, we analyzed SSQ data using nonparametric statistics. The maximum possible score on the SSQ was 235.62.

Prior to using the VR device, participants stood on a force plate and conducted two visual tasks. We then evaluated using the spatial magnitude and multifractality of center of pressure positions. We evaluated the spatial magnitude of postural activity in terms of
positional variability, which we defined operationally as the standard deviation of center of pressure positions. We evaluated the multifractality of postural activity using multifractal detrended fluctuation analysis, MF-DFA (e.g., Ihlen et al. 2013; Munafo et al. 2016). 

While using the VR device, participant's body sway data were collected using a magnetic tracking system (Fastrak; Polhemus, city, state). We evaluated the evolution of postural activity over the course of VR exposure. To evaluate the evolution of sway over time, we selected three 2-min time windows from the data, using a method previously outlined (Bonnet et al. 2006; Koslucher et al. 2014; Stoffregen et al. 2010). For the Sick group, we choose the first, the middle, and the final two minutes for each participant. For the Well group, the selection of time windows was based upon the mean exposure duration for the Sick group, which ensured that the sway data for both groups corresponded to the same mean duration of virtual reality exposure.


3. Instrument- or software-specific information needed to interpret the data:

For this study, we used an Oculus CV1 for displaying the virtual environment. The device comprised a lightweight (0.360 kg) headset that completely covered the field of view. The headset included separate displays for each eye, each with 1080 x 1020 resolution, yielding a 100 degree horizontal field of view.

Force plate data was collected using AccuSway Plus (AMTI, Watertown, MA). This device captured data at 50 Hz for the anteroposterior and mediolateral axes. 

We monitored body sway using a magnetic tracking system (FasTRAK, Polhemus, Colchester VT). To measure motion, we used two sensors, each sampled at 60 Hz. One sensor was attached to an HMD, while the other one was attached to the participant between their shoulder blades (at the level of the
C7 vertebra), using cloth medical tape.


4. Standards and calibration information, if appropriate: None


5. Environmental/experimental conditions:

Participants donned the Oculus CV1, and played Assetto Corsa, a commercial driving game, for fifteen minutes. Participants played this game while seated on a backless stool. Participants were either assigned to the driver condition or the passenger condition based on their subject ID. Drivers controlled the motion of the virtual automobile using a steering wheel and foot pedals.

6. Describe any quality-assurance procedures performed on the data:
Movement data was reviewed every day upon completion of collection. Analyses and final datasets were also reviewed by each researcher to ensure errors were prevented.

7. People involved with sample collection, processing, analysis and/or submission:
Christopher Curry, Ruixuan Li, Nicolette Peterson, Thomas Stoffregen, Elisheva Savvateev, Haylely Pierce-Ramsdell   





-----------------------------------------
DATA-SPECIFIC INFORMATION FOR: APAL 2019_Cybersickness_Demographics_Data
-----------------------------------------
<create sections for each dataset included>


1. Number of variables: 14


2. Number of cases/rows: 

79 Rows (Excluding headers) 


3. Missing data codes: None


4. Variable List
           

    A. Name: Subject #
       Description: Each subject was assigned a number to maintain anonymity. 

    B. Name: Sex 
       Description: The sex of each participant.

    C. Name: Driving Status 
       Description: An indication on whether a participant was assigned to the driver or passenger group.

    D. Name: Age
       Description: The age of each participant.

    E. Name: Height (cm)
       Description: The recorded height of each participant. 

    F. Name: Weight (lbs)
       Description: The recorded weight of each participant. 

    G. Name: Weight (kg)
       Description: The recorded weight was captured in lbs and then converted to kg.  

    H. Name: Do you currently play video games? (0: No; 1: Yes)
       Description: Participants were asked if they currently played video games and then their response was recorded. 

    I. Name: At what age did you begin to play video games? ( 0 = Never)
       Description: Participants were asked what age they began to play video games and then their response was recorded. 

    J. Name: How many years have you played video games? 
       Description: Participants were asked how many years they have played video games and then their response was recorded. 

    K. Name: Currently, approximately how many hours do you play each week?
       Description: Participants were asked how many hours they have played video games on a weekly basis and then their response was recorded. 

    L. Name: Have you ever used a virtual reality headset such as the oculus rift? (Yes: 1; No: 0)
       Description: Participants were asked if they have used virtual reality headset in the past and then their response was recorded. 

    M. Name: Do you own a virtual reality headset? (Yes:1, No:0)
       Description: Participants were asked if they own a virtual reality headset and then their response was recorded. 

    N. Name: Currently, approximately many hours do per week do you use any virtual reality headset?
       Description: Participants were asked if they played virtual reality on a weekly basis and then their response was recorded. 

    O. Name: First Visual Task 
       Description: First visual task presented to the participant, while they stood on the force plate. 

    P. Name: Second Visual Task 
       Description: Second visual task presented to the participant, while they stood on the force plate. 

    Q. Name: Discontinuation Time (Secs) 
       Description: If applicable, discontinuation for the participant in seconds. If not applicable, the cell is blank. 


-----------------------------------------
DATA-SPECIFIC INFORMATION FOR: APAL 2019 SSQ Data 
-----------------------------------------
<create sections for each dataset included>


1. Number of variables: 9


2. Number of cases/rows: 

79 Rows (Excluding headers) 


3. Missing data codes: None. If participants did not receive the SSQ-3 then there are no values for them. 


4. Variable List
           

    A. Name: Subject #
       Description: Each subject was assigned a number to maintain anonymity. 

    B. Name: SSQ1 Total Severity Score 
       Description: The calculated total severity score, following Kennedy et al., 1993 recommendation, on the first SSQ form.  

    C. Name: Indicated they Were Sick on SSQ1? (0=No,1=Yes)
       Description: A Yes or No if the participant reported being sick on their Simulator Sickness Questionnaire #1.

    D. Name: SSQ2 Total Severity Score 
       Description: The calculated total severity score, following Kennedy et al., 1993 recommendation, on the second SSQ form.  

    E. Name: Indicated they Were Sick on SSQ1? (0=No,1=Yes)
       Description: A Yes or No if the participant reported being sick on their Simulator Sickness Questionnaire #2.

    F. Name: Did Participate Complete an SSQ3? (0 = No, 1 = Yes) 
       Description: An indication of whether a participant received a third SSQ form. Participants received a third SSQ form if they indicated they were not sick on the second SSQ form. 

    G. Name: SSQ3 Total Severity Score
       Description: The calculated total severity score, following Kennedy et al., 1993 recommendation, on the third SSQ form.   

    H. Name: Indicated they Were Sick on SSQ3? (0=No, 1= Yes)
       Description: A Yes or No if the participant reported being sick on their Simulator Sickness Questionnaire #3. 

    I. Name: Post-Exposure Score Used in Analysis (SSQ2 for Every Participant Except 34M, who indicated they were sick on the SSQ3)
       Description: The Post-Exposure Total Severity Score. For every participant, but 34M, we used the SSQ 2 score.  


-----------------------------------------
DATA-SPECIFIC INFORMATION FOR: APAL 2019 Polhemus Data  
-----------------------------------------
<create sections for each dataset included>


1. Number of variables: 7


2. Number of cases/rows: 76 Subjects

Between 960-108000 rows, excluding header, due to variability in time. Participants had the ability to discontinue at anytime. If the participant did not discontinue then the maximum number was 108000. 

3. Missing data codes: None. 


4. Variable List
           

    A. Name: Sensor #
       Description: Two sensors were placed on the subject. Sensor 1, head, was placed on top of the HMD. While Sensor 2, Torso, was placed between the subject's shoulder blades (at the level of the C7 vertebra), using cloth medical tape.

    B. Name: X position in CM. 
       Description: The X axis data for the participant.  

    C. Name: Y position in CM. 
       Description: The Y axis data for the participant. 

    D. Name: Z position in CM. 
       Description: The Z axis data for the participant. 

    E. Name: Azimuth attitude in degrees.  
       Description: The Azimuth attitude data for the participant. 

    F. Name: Elevation attitude in degrees.  
       Description: The Elevation attitude data for the participant. 

    G. Name: Roll attitude in degrees.  
       Description: The Roll attitude data for the participant. 


-----------------------------------------
DATA-SPECIFIC INFORMATION FOR: APAL 2019 Force Plate Data 
-----------------------------------------
<create sections for each dataset included>


1. Number of variables: 4


2. Number of cases/rows: 79 Subjects

 3000 rows, exlcuding header. 

3. Missing data codes: None. 


4. Variable List
           

    A. Name: Subject #
       Description: Each subject was assigned a number to maintain anonymity.

    B. Name: Condition 
       Description: The visual task condition.  

    C. Name: Mediolateral 
       Description: The mediolateral axis data for the participant. 

    D. Name: Anterior Posterior 
       Description: The Anterior Posterior axis data for the participant. 

  


  










